# Introducing AI into Urban Studies

<!-- Page 1 -->

See discussions, stats, and author profiles for this publication at: https://www.researchgate.net/publication/373861342
 Introducing AI into Urban Studies
 Chapter  · October 2023
 DOI: 10.4324/9781003365877-1
 CITATIONS
 4
 READS
 572
 6 authors , including:
 Federico Cugurullo
 Trinity College Dublin
 54  PUBLICATIONS  2,989  CITATIONS
 SEE PROFILE
 Federico Caprotti
 University of Exeter
 119  PUBLICATIONS  3,438  CITATIONS
 SEE PROFILE
 Pauline Mcguirk
 University of Wollongong
 132  PUBLICATIONS  3,987  CITATIONS
 SEE PROFILE
 Simon Marvin
 The University of Sheffield
 235  PUBLICATIONS  15,694  CITATIONS
 SEE PROFILE
 All content following this page was uploaded by Federico Cugurullo on 24 January 2024.
 The user has requested enhancement of the downloaded file.


<!-- Page 2 -->

DOI:  10.4324/9781003365877-1
 Introduction: the dawn of AI urbanism
 Innovation in artificial intelligence (AI) is transforming cities in unprece -
 dented ways. Robots are increasingly managing key urban services, perform -
 ing jobs that were once the exclusive domain of humans and maintaining the
 infrastructure of cities ( Lynch et al., 2022 ;  Macrorie et al., 2021 ). Self-driving
 cars are reshaping urban transport systems, thereby triggering new mobilities
 that impact the design of the built environment ( Cugurullo et al. 2021 ;
 Dowling and M c Guirk, 2022 ). City brains and digital platforms are gradually
 reengineering the practice of urban governance by operating entire urban
 systems that range from health to transport and from security to ecosystems
 ( Caprotti and Liu, 2020 ;  Curran and Smart, 2021 ;  Marvin et al., 2022 ).
 Meanwhile, through mobile apps and personal computers, invisible software
 agents are sifting and sorting urban lives, for instance, deciding which resi -
 dents to quarantine and which residents qualify for a mortgage ( Kitchin,
 2020 ;  Lee and Floridi, 2021 ). In essence, the advent of AI introduces multiple
 non-biological intelligences that act upon and within cities. For the first time
 in history, the control of the city is not determined exclusively by humans. It is
 also influenced by AIs whose logics and actions sometimes diverge significantly
 from ours ( Cugurullo, 2021 ;  Russell, 2019 ). We are witnessing the beginning
 of a new and uncertain urban era, replete with risks and opportunities.
 In different spaces and through diverse modalities, AIs and urban systems
 are converging at a rapid pace ( Amoore, 2023 ;  Son et al., 2023 ;  While et al.,
 2021 ;  Yigitcanlar et al., 2023 ). The urban changes associated with AI are
 challenging to describe and analyse in theoretical and empirical terms. There
 1
 INTRODUCING AI INTO URBAN
 STUDIES
 Federico Cugurullo, Federico Caprotti, Matthew Cook,
 Andrew Karvonen, Pauline M
c
Guirk and Simon Marvin
 Citation:  Cugurullo,  F.,  Caprotti,  F.,  Cook,  M.,  Karvonen,  A.,  McGuirk,
P.,  &  Marvin,  S.(2023).  Introducing  AI  into  Urban  Studies.  In Cugurullo,
F.,  Caprotti,  F.,  Cook,  M.,  Karvonen,  A.,  McGuirk,  P.,  &  Marvin,  S.
(Eds.). Artificial  Intelligence  and  the  City:  Urbanistic
Perspectives  on  AI .  Routledge.  Pages  1-19


<!-- Page 3 -->

2  Federico Cugurullo et al.
 are many different types of AI being applied in heterogeneous urban spaces,
 unleashing a transformative force of rare impetus. These AIs are  urban  in the
 sense that they operate primarily in urban environments and, in order to
 function, they need resources and infrastructures, such as Big Data, electrical
 grids and server farms, that are urban in nature. We refer to this polymor -
 phous agglomeration of AIs, comprising robots, autonomous vehicles, city
 brains and software agents, as  urban artificial intelligences  or simply  urban
 AI  (see also  Cugurullo, 2020 ;  Luusua et al., 2023 ). Moreover, we note that
 the diffusion of urban AI in the life, governance and planning of cities is
 generating a distinct kind of urbanism which we term  AI urbanism . Here, the
 configuration of urban systems, the form of the built environment and, more
 broadly, the experiences of urban residents are morphing into something
 markedly distinct from past iterations and in ways that are only partially
 understood.
 The emergence of AI urbanism is neither a linear nor an atemporal pro -
 cess, but rather a multiform and geographically sensitive phenomenon influ -
 enced by previous urbanisms, that is destabilizing the material and immaterial
 fabric of cities. In this book, while we argue that the use of AI technologies
 in the management of urban services and infrastructures is connected to well-
 known practices of smart urbanism (see  Coletta et al., 2019 ;  Karvonen et al.,
 2019 ;  Willis and Aurigi, 2020 ), we also claim that the emergence of AI in
 cities is a turning point at which  smart  is theoretically and empirically insuf -
 ficient to explain the urban transformations generated by AI. Urban AI would
 not be able to function without common smart technologies, such as sensors
 and the repositories of Big Data that they generate. At the same time, how -
 ever, urban AI embodies technologies, capabilities and operations which go
 well beyond traditional smart-city initiatives. For example, the ability to
 extract concepts and to reason, and the power to decide and act autono -
 mously in real-life environments without human supervision, situates AI and
 its numerous urban incarnations in theoretical and empirical grounds which
 diverge from smart urbanism and, thus, require close scrutiny and debate
 ( Cugurullo, 2020 ).
 Drawing upon a range of urban disciplines and over 20 international case
 studies, the aim of this book is to explore in theory and practice how AI
 intersects with and alters the city. The chapters reveal a multitude of reper -
 cussions that AI is having on urban society, urban infrastructure, urban gov -
 ernance, urban planning and urban sustainability. At the same time, this
 collection aims to examine how the city, far from being a passive recipient of
 new technologies, is influencing and reframing AI through subtle processes of
 co-constitution and co-determination. The focus on AI is specific in the sense
 that we seek to explicitly look beyond the literature on smart urbanism, by
 synthesizing new empirical data on AI and its hitherto overlooked urban
 dimensions and presenting novel concepts and theories about AI urbanism.


<!-- Page 4 -->

Introducing AI into urban studies  3
 Our focus is also broad since we take into account multiple types of AI and
 urban scales from the individual citizen to the single building and from entire
 cities to regional and international urban networks.
 Overall, we advance three main contributions and arguments in the book.
 First, we discuss the emergence of a post-smart trajectory for cities in which
 new material and decision-making capabilities are being assembled through
 multiple AIs. In so doing, we inquire into the distinctiveness and implications
 of novel AI logics in the urban context. Second, we stress the importance of
 understanding the mutually constitutive relations between the new experi -
 ences enabled by AI technology and the urban context. We question how AI
 shapes urban life and places and how the urban condition shapes AI in turn.
 Third, we engage with the concepts required to clarify the often opaque rela -
 tions that exist between AI and the city, as well as how to make sense of these
 relations from a theoretical perspective. In essence, this collection provides a
 state-of-the-art review of AI urbanism, from its historical roots to its contem -
 porary global emergence, in an attempt to develop the empirical and theoret -
 ical foundations for the next generation of urban socio-technical studies.
 In the following sections, we unpack the connections between AI and the
 urban by clarifying the concept of  urban AI  and illustrating its most promi -
 nent incarnations, namely autonomous vehicles, urban robots, city brains
 and urban software agents. We then explain how the emergence of urban AI
 is contributing to the formation of a new type of urbanism which we call  AI
 urbanism . We note how AI urbanism derives from but also extends well
 beyond smart urbanism, along three main axes: function, presence and
 agency. We discuss the similarities and differences underpinning  AI  and  smart
 urbanism and, after stressing the problematic implications of human–machine
 interactions in the making and governance of cities, we call on urban research -
 ers and stakeholders to scrutinize the critical intersections between urban
 development and the development of artificial intelligences.
 Making sense of AI from an urbanistic perspective
 AI is now one of the dominant forces that is transforming our planet and
 lives, and yet its meaning and manifestations are elusive ( Crawford, 2021 ).
 As  Greenfield (2018)  notes, AI is an obscure and esoteric set of technologies
 in the sense that the intricate mechanics and thought processes of artificial
 intelligences are usually understood only by a small group of experts with
 specialized knowledge in computer science and engineering. This epistemo -
 logical complexity is exacerbated by the fact that neither a single type of AI
 nor a universal blueprint to build one exists ( Bostrom, 2017 ;  Cave et al.,
 2020 ). The field of AI is thus difficult to navigate, especially from the per -
 spective of the social sciences and humanities. To address this issue, we pro -
 pose a threefold approach to make sense of AI. In this section, we begin by


<!-- Page 5 -->

4  Federico Cugurullo et al.
 acknowledging the wide range of AI technologies that are present in the
 world. We then summarize the core characteristics of AI across its multiple
 incarnations and, finally, provide examples to make them visible (and there -
 fore easier to understand) by focusing on how they manifest themselves in
 real-life urban spaces.
 The first step in making sense of AI is to talk about artificial  intelligences
 and avoid the conceptual trap of singular nouns. A singular noun refers to
 (and thus makes us think about) a clearly delineated person, place or thing.
 Specifically in relation to the subject of our inquiry, the term  AI , as a singular
 noun, is misleading since it implies the existence of a singular technology
 possessing a singular type of intelligence. In reality, this is far from being the
 case. There are many different artificial intelligences manifesting diverse types
 and degrees of intelligence ( Russell and Norvig, 2016 ;  Samoili et al., 2020 ).
 A useful analogy here is offered by a widely recognized form of intelligence:
 biological intelligence . We know that there is an extraordinary variety of
 intelligent life forms on Earth, ranging from mammals to insects, and human
 intelligence represents only a fraction of this variety. In science, we do not
 generalize biological intelligence and instead acknowledge the cognitive and
 behavioural differences as well as the similarities that exist among species.
 This same logic applies to AI. We understand AI as a complex cosmos com -
 prising a myriad of diverse non-biological intelligences whose cognition and
 behaviour varies significantly from case to case.
 The second step is to identify and characterize the most common traits
 that are shared among different AIs. These traits include (a) the quality of
 being artificial, (b) the capacity for learning, (c) the ability to extract con -
 cepts, (d) the power to manage uncertainty and (e) the capability to act
 rationally and (f) autonomously. All AIs are considered to be artificial, in the
 sense that their development is not the outcome of a natural process such as
 the formation of the human brain, whose current morphology is the byprod -
 uct of thousands of years of evolution ( Bruner, 2021 ;  Galway-Witham and
 Stringer, 2018 ). In contrast, AI is either human-made or, as  Bostrom (2017)
 notes, created by machines through technological processes that are rela -
 tively fast. The assembly of a simple robot, for instance, takes less than five
 minutes, while algorithms can be created in a matter of hours ( Rubenstein
 et al., 2014 ;  Sherry and Thompson, 2021 ).
 In terms of key capabilities, AIs can learn and develop knowledge  directly
 by sensing a given environment using sensors such as cameras and micro -
 phones, and  indirectly  by being fed large data sets ( Russell and Norvig,
 2016 ). AIs can then make sense of the information that they acquire by
 extracting concepts from it ( Bostrom, 2017 ). This capacity is a mark of their
 intelligence since it shows the ability to find meanings and recognize ideas in
 what is being observed. Examples include AI-driven cars that are capable of
 understanding that the colour red in a traffic light means that they must stop,


<!-- Page 6 -->

Introducing AI into urban studies  5
 and service robots operating in a restaurant that can distinguish customers
 from inanimate objects and then comprehend that it is a good idea to attend
 to the customers. It is also important to note that AIs can, as a result of
 learning,  devise  new  rule  sets  that  take  us  beyond  previously  existing
 human-centred logics. As  Bostrom (2017)  remarks, it would be dangerous to
 always assume an affinity between the logics developed by biological and
 non-biological intelligences.
 Ultimately concepts lead to actions and most AIs are designed to act in
 chaotic and uncertain situations in which some information might be missing
 or unclear ( Kanal and Lemmer, 2014 ). Their actions are considered to be
 rational inasmuch as they are ‘based on reasons’ which determine what is
 right or wrong and inform their behaviour ( Lupia et al., 2000 : 7;  Russell and
 Norvig, 2016 ). This assumes the presence of a moral order underpinning the
 actions of AIs. However, the field of AI ethics remains underdeveloped, espe -
 cially in practical terms. AI moral guidelines are often incoherent and ignored
 by the private sector actors that are supposed to implement them ( Munn,
 2022 ). As a result, there is a problematic lack of clarity regarding the moral
 compass behind AIs’ actions, particularly in contexts in which AI systems
 operate with humans out of the loop. When humans do not steer the actions
 of an AI or supervise its behaviour, that AI can be said to be  autonomous
 because it is exercising intelligence in an independent manner ( Cugurullo,
 2020 ;  Levesque, 2017 ).
 The urban is the space where AIs become most prominently visible and
 materially situated in the physical landscape. It is the locus where their
 actions occur and where their behaviours are materialized. AI is intrinsically
 linked to urbanity, for three interconnected reasons. First, AI requires physi -
 cal environments to act upon, and these are frequently urban. Autonomous
 cars, for example, operate on public roads in urban settlements. Similarly,
 service robots function in shops and restaurants located in urban environ -
 ments. Even the actions of the most ethereal AIs have an inevitable material
 dimension, like in the case of algorithms that calculate the market value of a
 property or predict the location of a crime. Second, AI is an  agent  ( Russell
 and Norvig, 2016 ). As such, it acts and, by nature, it engages in a plethora of
 activities. Urban settlements encapsulate an increasing proportion and range
 of activities on our planet ( Balland et al., 2020 ;  Elmqvist et al., 2021 ;  Kaddar
 et al., 2022 ). Therefore, whether an AI is poised to participate in a social
 activity, engage in an economic transaction, influence a political process or
 contribute to global environmental changes, it is compelled to interact with
 urban systems. Third, the development of AI depends on urban development.
 Most AIs currently develop their intelligence through processes of  machine
 learning  whereby they are ‘set loose on vast fields of data’ to learn from them
 ( Greenfield, 2018 : 220). As  Lee (2018: 14)  points out, ‘there’s no data like
 more data.’ The more data an AI is exposed to, the more and faster its


<!-- Page 7 -->

6  Federico Cugurullo et al.
 intelligence grows. As the primary location of manifold human activity,
 urban spaces are massive generators of data, and it is thus in the urban realm
 that AI has the greatest opportunity to learn and evolve.
 In terms of quality, the urban generates the fine-grain data most useful for
 machine learning. It is  real-life data  which differs substantially from datasets
 that are carefully curated and cleaned by computer scientists and then stored
 digitally. In urban spaces, instead, AI learns  in the wild  and has the possibil -
 ity to contemplate actually existing social, political, economic, cultural and
 environmental phenomena as they unfold in real time in the real world. In
 terms of quantity, cities in particular offer the largest sources of data. Cities,
 as urban spaces with high population densities, host an unparalleled concen -
 tration of human activities that fuel intense processes of consumption, social
 interaction, mobility and intellectual exchange ( Balland et al., 2020 ;  Moran
 et al., 2018 ). There are few limits to what can happen in a large city, which
 is an ideal condition for machine learning and its limitless thirst for knowl -
 edge. In China, for example, AI companies are building a competitive advan -
 tage by using dense cities as a playground for machine learning ( Lee, 2018 ).
 In essence, the contemporary city is the microcosm through which AI observes
 and learns about the entire world.
 The connection between the urban and AI makes the latter visible in four
 distinct forms which, in turn, can be understood as four main types of urban
 AI. The first one is represented by  autonomous vehicles  (AVs). These are
 terrestrial devices built for transporting persons or things, which are driven
 by an AI. They are characterized by different vehicle types including autono -
 mous cars, trucks and buses, as well as by diverse public and private owner -
 ship models and service types, such as car-sharing, mass transport and
 mobility-as-a-service ( Acheampong et al., 2021 ;  Nikitas et al., 2021 ). The
 urbanity of AVs is evident from a spatial perspective since this type of urban
 AI necessitates urban spaces to fulfil its main function: transportation. Most
 pointedly, autonomous cars operate on public roads predominantly in urban
 environments where the quality of road infrastructure tends to be higher (and
 thus easier to sense and navigate for an AI) than in rural areas, and where it
 is more common to find fast and reliable communication networks. Cities, in
 particular, are at the centre of AV innovation and related disruptions (see
 Figure 1.1 ). It is in cities that companies like Waymo and Tesla are testing
 their autonomous cars ( Dowling and M c Guirk, 2022 ). It is in cities that
 car-sharing services and mobility-as-a-service initiatives abound and drive
 the deployment of fully autonomous fleets à la Uber ( Schaller, 2021 ). It is
 across cities that autonomous trucks are employed to sustain the logistics of
 urban economies. And it is in the city that human road users (ranging from
 drivers to pedestrians and from cyclists to people with disabilities) and AVs
 are struggling to share the same spaces and ultimately competing to preserve
 their own mobility ( Gaio and Cugurullo, 2023 ;  Talebian and Mishra, 2022 ).


<!-- Page 8 -->

Introducing AI into urban studies  7
 Urban robots  represent a second type of urban AI. Similar to AVs, robots
 have an evident physical presence, but unlike vehicles, they do not have an
 empty interior to accommodate passengers or cargo and do not operate
 exclusively within the field of transportation. Instead, urban robots come in
 many different shapes and their influence cuts across a plethora of urban
 domains. There are robots whose design mimics the general features of the
 human body including limbs, eyes and an erect posture, with  androids
 being almost indistinguishable from humans ( Mara and Appel, 2015 ;
 Müller et al., 2021 ). Other robots, such as  drones , do not have an anthro -
 pomorphic appearance, while  nanobots  are so small that they are almost
 undetectable ( Jackman, 2022 ;  Toumey, 2013 ). Overall, urban robots are
 infiltrating core sectors of cities, including security, education, retail and
 hospitality, and their role in the maintenance of urban infrastructure is
 increasing ( Macrorie et al., 2021 ;  Tiddi et al., 2020 ;  Valdez and Cook,
 2023 ;  While et al., 2021 ). In so doing, robots are in continuous interaction
 with the principal inhabitants of the built environment: humans.  Service
 robots , for instance, populate everyday urban spaces and are designed to
 assist humans on  the frontline  ( Pozharliev et al., 2021 ;  Wirtz et al., 2018 ).
 This position involves direct and often face-to-face interactions, as in the
 case of robot waiters that are deployed to understand and accommodate a
 client’s needs (see  Figure 1.2 ). The proliferation of service robots, however,
 FIGURE 1.1  An autonomous car operating in Hong Kong.
 Source:  © Shutterstock/Yu Chun Christopher Wong.


<!-- Page 9 -->

8  Federico Cugurullo et al.
 does not necessarily imply cooperation. De facto urban robots are a ‘new
 class’ of intelligent machines whose labour frequently comes at the expense
 of a human’s job, and it is important to remember that ‘few employment
 fields are immune’ ( Bissell and Del Casino, 2017 : 436; Del Casino,  2016 :
 847). From this perspective, urban robots are replacing rather than sup -
 porting their human counterparts.
 A third type of urban AI is the  city brain . City brains are  large-scale  urban
 AIs inasmuch as their agency extends to large portions of urban territory,
 infrastructure and the public sector ( Cugurullo, 2021 ;  Zhang et al., 2019 ).
 While in the case of AVs and urban robots, AI is animating a car or a drone,
 in the case of city brains what is being controlled by AI are buildings, tele -
 communication networks and even entire cities. This type of urban AI is
 materially and geographically more extensive but also elusive when com -
 pared to the previous types. It does not reside in a single material artefact.
 Instead, it is located within a digital platform, infused through the urban
 fabric, where AI acts like a brain and controls different parts of the city in a
 way that resembles a human brain in control of different parts of the human
 body. Due to their existence inside digital platforms, city brains can be
 understood as an extension of  platform urbanism  ( Barns, 2019 ;  Caprotti et
 al., 2022 ;  Caprotti and Liu, 2020 ;  Hodson et al., 2020 ). Because of its
 hybrid physical and digital nature, platform urbanism is challenging to map
 FIGURE 1.2  A robot waiter serving food at a restaurant in Chennai (India).
 Source:  © Getty Images/Arun Sankar.


<!-- Page 10 -->

Introducing AI into urban studies  9
 and so are city brains ( Fields et al., 2020 ;  van der Graaf and Ballon, 2019 ).
 To further complicate matters geographically, city brains have  actuators
 which bridge digital and physical spaces. These are material components
 through which city brains penetrate the real world, such as CCTV cameras
 that a city brain uses as eyes to observe what is happening in the city ( Curran
 and Smart, 2021 ). However, more than just a neutral observer, a city brain
 acts on the city and influences its governance by attempting to predict the
 future and enacts adaptations to respond to future conditions including, for
 example, anticipated traffic congestions or concentration of demand for
 emergency services ( Cugurullo, 2021 ;  Zhang et al., 2019 ). This is essentially
 what  Brayne (2017)  defines as the shift from  reactive  to  proactive  approaches
 to urban governance, whereby the unprecedented computational power of
 AI is exploited to calculate large amounts of future possibilities, and then
 enable certain urban futures while suppressing others ( Luque-Ayala and
 Marvin, 2020 ).
 Urban software agents  are a fourth type of urban AI which captures a
 seemingly invisible yet highly impactful dimension of AI in urban contexts.
 While the other types of urban AI are physically embodied and possess
 material actuators allowing them to act tangibly on cities, urban software
 agents are immaterial. Examples include computer programs that use algo -
 rithms to determine which individuals or families qualify for a home mort -
 gage or insurance policy, contact-tracing apps that identify individuals to be
 quarantined, AI chatbots that create social bonds with humans and digital
 assistants such as Alexa and Siri that respond to voice commands and exe -
 cute domestic tasks ( Kitchin, 2020 ;  Lee and Floridi, 2021 ;  O'Neil, 2016 ;
 Strengers and Kennedy, 2021 ). Using Waze, a popular navigation map app,
 as an example,  Fisher (2022: 75)  notes that these aethereal AIs have a  spati -
 ality  since they change ‘how space is known, experienced, and acted upon.’
 Urban software agents are more prolific than one might imagine and their
 immateriality belies their profound influence on the daily lives of urban res -
 idents. From a geographical perspective, the location of many urban soft -
 ware agents shows how AI is entering our private spaces, including our
 homes, and becoming part of our everyday life. In the shape of software
 agents, AI is always with us, whether talking through a speech synthesizer
 sitting on the kitchen counter or simply operating our smartphones silently.
 The intimacy of this AI tech implies that, willingly or not, we are constantly
 sharing personal information with AI systems ( Zuboff, 2019 ). These are
 systems that, XAI (Explainable Artificial Intelligence) scholars warn us, only
 few experts in computer science and engineers comprehend. Yet, as  Zuboff
 (2019: v)  remarks, these AIs are growing in popularity, assimilating unprec -
 edented quantities of behavioural data and contributing to the formation of
 a system of surveillance ‘that asserts dominance over society’ ( Baum et al.,
 2022 ;  Langer et al., 2021 ).


<!-- Page 11 -->

10  Federico Cugurullo et al.
 From smart to AI urbanism
 The four types of urban AI described above serve as the organizational scaf -
 folding for this book and provide a means to classify the current evolution of
 urbanism from  smart  to  AI . In  Part I  of the book,  Autonomous Vehicles and
 Mobility , the authors examine the impact that vehicles driven by AI are hav -
 ing on cities and the social, political and economic dynamics through which
 such vehicles are accommodated and integrated into the city. In  Part II ,
 Urban Robots and Robotic Spaces , the contributors illuminate the presence
 and role of robots in a variety of urban domains, as well as the diversity of
 urban spaces altered by robotics. The authors in  Part III  of the book explore
 City Brains and Urban Platforms  and highlight the operation and influence
 of large-scale AI control systems intended to manage vast portions, aspects
 and domains of the city, which underpin everyday life. In the final part ( Part
 IV ),  Urban Software Agents and Algorithms , the authors focus on immate -
 rial AIs and consider the implications of digital assistants, computer pro -
 grams and seemingly neutral machinic procedures for urban living, design
 and governance.
 Overall, the book draws on over 20 case studies based on empirical
 research. We use these case studies to illustrate the emergence of  urban AI
 defined as a class of material and immaterial artificial intelligences that oper -
 ate most intensely in urban spaces and that depend on urban resources, as
 they mediate urban services and influence urban sectors, by means of their
 capacity to understand manifold spheres of urban life and act on them in an
 autonomous manner (see  Figure 1.3 ). In addition, we emphasize how the
 proliferation of urban AI across urban spaces and sectors is generating what
 we term  AI urbanism : a novel urbanism that derives from smart urbanism
 but also departs both empirically and theoretically from traditional smart-
 city projects and trajectories. More specifically, we identify a series of points
 of connection and departure along three axes, namely  function ,  presence  and
 agency , captured in  Figure 1.4 .
 First, there is a notable difference between the function of technologies
 employed in smart cities versus the function of artificial intelligences in AI
 urbanism. The technologies in smart cities are used to count and calculate
 urban metabolic processes. This involves quantifying specific phenomena,
 such as household energy consumption and neighbourhood crime rates by
 collating and analysing  Big Data  ( Bhati et al., 2017 ;  Catlett et al., 2019 ;
 Kitchin and McArdle, 2016 ). In contrast, urban AI produces an account of
 urban phenomena by collecting and analysing data to explain why and how
 certain things occur in cities. Urban AIs extract patterns and concepts from
 large datasets and follow seemingly objective and unbiased logics to produce
 predictions of urban futures yet to come. This is particularly evident in the
 case of urban software agents like  Palantir , a predictive policing system


<!-- Page 12 -->

Introducing AI into urban studies  11
 FIGURE 1.3

Urban AI.
 Source:
 authors’ original.
 URBAN AI a class of AIs
Autonomous vehicles Urban robots City brains Urban software agents
needing urban resources to function

Infrastructures and facilities Data for machine learning Access to activities Urban spaces to act on operating mostly in urban spaces
mediating urban services and influencing urban sectors
Education
Mobility Security
Retail
Health
Hospitality
Located mostly in
cities
 Acting rationally and autonomously Handling uncertainty
Roads, buildings, homes,
shops, etc.
Socio, environmental, economic and political Big Data + Real-life data Electrical grids, server
farms, etc.
Learning and extracting concepts
 Capabilities
• • • •
Situate AI in the physical landscape Multiple spheres of urban life


<!-- Page 13 -->

12  Federico Cugurullo et al.
 whose function is to explain why some urban residents are more likely to
 commit a crime and to foresee where unlawful activities will cluster within a
 given city ( McDaniel and Pease, 2021 ;  Richardson et al., 2019 ). In essence,
 along the  function  axis, we observe an evolution in the role and purpose of
 technology from performing calculations on enormous sets of quantitative
 data to providing an account of the urban condition. AI uses Big Data to
 produce explanatory and interpretative models akin to narratives. These
 models are not comprehensive stories analogous to human storytelling, but
 they denote AI’s novel capacity to interpret urban phenomena, rather than
 simply quantifying them. An interpretation is, in turn, a sign of thinking.
 Although rudimentary and different from human thought processes, such
 manifestations of thinking are absent in traditional smart city technologies.
 The second axis concerns the space where urban artificial intelligences
 function. While smart-city technologies are usually installed in confined
 spaces or infrastructures that are detached and hidden from humans, urban
 AIs are more visible sociotechnical phenomena. A smart grid, for example, is
 located below the surface of the city in areas that are inaccessible to urban
 residents ( Quitzow and Rohde, 2022 ), where it manages the distribution of
 energy services. Citizens are aware of the existence of this technology but
 cannot see it because it is buried in the bowels of the city, away from human
 perception. Other smart technologies provide limited accessibility and visibil -
 ity. In urban transport, for instance, automated track-bound metro systems
 and personal rapid transport networks can be accessed by passengers, but
 only in specially built guideways that are often underground and devoid of
 other vehicles and, above all, of pedestrians ( Cugurullo, 2021 ). This is not
 FIGURE 1.4  Comparing smart and AI urbanism.
 Source:  authors’ original.


<!-- Page 14 -->

Introducing AI into urban studies  13
 the case in AI urbanism. Autonomous vehicles traverse public roads, operat -
 ing next to pedestrians and sharing the same space with traditional vehicles
 and cyclists ( Brovarone et al., 2021 ;  Martens et al., 2022 ). Many robots
 work on the frontline in environments such as shops, restaurants and air -
 ports, where they are constantly encountering and interfacing with humans
 ( Lin et al., 2022 ;  Sumartojo  et al.,  2022 ). Even software agents can make
 their presence visible by animating the apps in our omnipresent smartphones.
 Overall, this describes an evolution of the  presence  of technology from being
 covert in smart urbanism to becoming overt in AI urbanism.
 Third, we observe notable differences with respect to  agency . In smart
 urbanism, technologies are programmed to repeat the same actions over and
 over. They are  automated  technologies in the sense that they follow ‘repeti -
 tive processes’ which are ‘constant and automatic’ ( Bourdieu, 2018 : 17).
 These processes are programmed by human engineers and computer scien -
 tists and the machine is compelled to abide by them. A smart sensor, for
 example, automatically switches on the light every time a movement is
 detected. Similarly, an automated tram follows a prescribed route and is
 bound to fixed tracks from which it cannot escape. In essence, when it comes
 to automation, ‘there is no room for variations or improvisation’ ( Cugurullo,
 2021 : 161). In contrast, urban AIs are becoming more and more autono -
 mous. Our observation resonates with the notion of  autonomous technology
 developed by Langdon  Winner (1978: 16) , whereby ‘technology governs its
 own course.’ At the end of the third axis, machines decide the course of their
 actions. They make important decisions de facto engaging with ethical
 conundrums about what is right or wrong on a logical course of action
 derived from machine learning and then act accordingly, with little or no
 human supervision. An autonomous vehicle, for instance, determines its own
 route which is constantly changing  on the run  as unexpected factors, such as
 traffic jams and accidents, come into play. In this context rich in uncertainty,
 autonomous technologies introduce new ethical dilemmas, especially in situ -
 ations  where  harms  to  humans  are  unavoidable  ( Awad  et  al.,  2018 ;
 Hagendorff, 2020 ;  Kaker et al., 2020 ). Autonomy is not a concern in smart
 cities where decision-making and ethical decisions remain firmly in the hands
 of humans.
 Cutting across these three main axes, we begin to notice the emergence of
 a fourth axis which encapsulates the dominant  discourse  underpinning smart
 urbanism and AI urbanism. The grand narrative that fueled the genesis of
 smart cities was based upon a modernist ideal of control ( Cugurullo, 2018 ;
 Datta, 2015 ) whereby technology was understood as an instrument in the
 hands of humans, designed and employed to fulfil human dreams and visions
 in an anthropocentric manner ( Berman, 1983 ;  Boyer, 1986 ;  Cugurullo,
 2021 ). Nowadays, in the practice of AI urbanism, some of the core principles
 of modernity no longer hold. In particular, AI urbanism pushes beyond the


<!-- Page 15 -->

14  Federico Cugurullo et al.
 modernist ideal of control by ceding agency to autonomous technologies that
 take initiative instead of following human instructions. Urban artificial intel -
 ligences cannot be conceptualized as tools completely in the hands of humans
 and in the service of human visions, given that they have the capacity to
 develop their own narratives and to act autonomously in the pursuit of emer -
 gent futures. The modernist logic of control applied in the case of smart cities
 where technology was confined and contained in specific spaces, but it is not
 pertinent in an urban context in which multiple AIs increasingly roam free as
 autonomous agents. Modernist ideals of control are gradually falling apart,
 along a trajectory towards  post-modernity  which we understand as the fal -
 tering of the tenets, assumptions and promises of modernity ( Harvey, 1989 ).
 More specifically, we see in the advent of an emergent urbanism shaped by
 co-constitutive human/AI relations a condition in which modernist promises
 of centralized and anthropocentric control are broken by dispersed forms of
 control that are more-than-human in nature. This post-modern age of AI
 upends the central role of humans as the sole builders and governors of cities,
 spreads power and control across uncharted digital platforms and opens up
 urban development to new post-human conditions.
 Conclusions: transcending smart urbanism in the age of AI
 The urban trends that we have discussed in this chapter indicate that, with
 the advent of AI in cities, practices and theories of urban development, gov -
 ernance and design are transcending what for decades has been known as
 smart urbanism . The transition to AI urbanism has begun, but its empirical
 and theoretical implications remain to be seen. The future that lies ahead is
 unknown, though it is unlikely to be spatially homogeneous, as different cit -
 ies are experimenting with AI technologies in ways that reflect their specific
 geography, history and political economy. We already see the emergence of
 new master-planned urban settlements such as The Line in Saudi Arabia,
 where AI is being rolled out to have complete control over urban governance
 and a single AI system is intended to monitor the life of every urban resident
 ( Batty, 2022 ). In other places, AI is being implemented through small-scale
 urban experiments to manage buildings and districts autonomously, which
 suggests that AI’s impacts will be felt differentially  within  as well as across
 urban geographies ( Aguilar et al., 2021 ;  Marvin et al., 2022 ). Overall, the
 comprehensive and piecemeal applications of AI serve as two ends on a broad
 spectrum of trajectories of AI urbanism. However, one common denomina -
 tor in AI urbanism is clear: a more-than-human component that is redefining
 the urban experience, as artificial and biological intelligences collide and col -
 lude in the making and governance of cities.
 These collisions and collusions of humans and urban AIs will be signifi -
 cant regardless of the scale. Some urbanists, for example, ponder the genesis


<!-- Page 16 -->

Introducing AI into urban studies  15
 of  autonomous cities  where ‘diverse artificial intelligences, from service
 robots to digital platforms, perform urban activities that have traditionally
 been human activities’ ( Allam, 2021 ;  Cugurullo, 2021 : 17). Even if such fully
 autonomous cities do not become a reality around the world, there will still
 be a myriad of small-scale human–AI interactions whose impact on the every -
 day life of cities and urban residents will be largely invisible but profound.
 For example, one can imagine the devastating consequences of a declined
 mortgage application assessed by an AI on a family struggling to find shelter
 during a housing crisis. Such an example is not the work of science fiction. As
 this book shows, similar episodes are rapidly emerging as the new normal for
 everyday life in many cities. The enormous and multifaceted impact of AI
 urbanism, and its problematic and progressive possibilities, requires sus -
 tained scrutiny, research and critique. AI technologies have been introduced
 into the city and they are here to stay. Their form, function and impacts will
 be variable and co-constituted by existing urban contexts. Now is the time to
 introduce AI into urban studies, to understand empirically and theoretically
 the intersection between the development of artificial intelligences and the
 development of cities in the decades to come.
 References
 Acheampong, R. A., Cugurullo, F., Gueriau, M., & Dusparic, I. (2021). Can autono -
 mous vehicles enable sustainable mobility in future cities? Insights and policy chal -
 lenges from user preferences over different urban transport options.  Cities , 112,
 103134.
 Aguilar, J., Garces-Jimenez, A., R-Moreno, M. D., & García, R. (2021). A systematic
 literature review on the use of artificial intelligence in energy self-management in
 smart buildings.  Renewable and Sustainable Energy Reviews , 151, 111530.
 Allam, Z. (2021). Big data, artificial intelligence and the rise of autonomous smart
 cities. In Allam, Z. (Ed.),  The rise of autonomous smart cities . Palgrave Macmillan,
 Cham, 7–30.
 Amoore, L. (2023). Machine learning political orders.  Review of International
 Studies , 49(1), 20–36.
 Awad, E., Dsouza, S., Kim, R., Schulz, J., Henrich, J., Shariff, A., … Rahwan, I.
 (2018). The moral machine experiment.  Nature , 563(7729), 59–64.
 Balland, P. A., Jara-Figueroa, C., Petralia, S. G., Steijn, M., Rigby, D. L., & Hidalgo,
 C. A. (2020). Complex economic activities concentrate in large cities.  Nature
 Human Behaviour , 4(3), 248–254.
 Barns, S. (2019).  Platform urbanism: Negotiating platform ecosystems in connected
 cities . Springer Nature, Berlin.
 Batty, M. (2022). The Linear City: Illustrating the logic of spatial equilibrium.
 Computational Urban Science , 2(1), 1–17.
 Baum, K., Mantel, S., Schmidt, E., & Speith, T. (2022). From responsibility to reason-giv -
 ing explainable artificial intelligence.  Philosophy & Technology , 35(1), 1–30.
 Berman, M. (1983).  All that is solid melts into air: The experience of modernity .
 Verso, London.


<!-- Page 17 -->

16  Federico Cugurullo et al.
 Bhati, A., Hansen, M., & Chan, C. M. (2017). Energy conservation through smart
 homes in a smart city: A lesson for Singapore households.  Energy Policy , 104,
 230–239.
 Bissell, D., & Del Casino, V. J. (2017). Whither labor geography and the rise of the
 robots?  Social & Cultural Geography , 18(3), 435–442.
 Bostrom, N. (2017).  Superintelligence . Oxford University Press, Oxford.
 Bourdieu, P. (2018).  On the state: Lectures at the Collège de France, 1989–1992 .
 John Wiley & Sons.
 Boyer, M. C. (1986).  Dreaming the rational city: The myth of American city planning .
 MIT Press, Cambridge.
 Brayne, S. (2017). Big data surveillance: The case of policing.  American Sociological
 Review , 82(5), 977–1008.
 Brovarone, E. V., Scudellari, J., & Staricco, L. (2021). Planning the transition to auton -
 omous driving: A policy pathway towards urban liveability.  Cities , 108, 102996.
 Bruner, E. (2021). Evolving human brains: Paleoneurology and the fate of Middle
 Pleistocene.  Journal of Archaeological Method and Theory , 28(1), 76–94.
 Caprotti, F., Chang, I., Catherine, C., & Joss, S. (2022). Beyond the smart city: A
 typology of platform urbanism.  Urban Transformations , 4(1), 1–21.
 Caprotti, F., & Liu, D. (2020). Platform urbanism and the Chinese smart city: The
 co-production and territorialisation of Hangzhou City Brain.  GeoJournal , 87,
 1–15.
 Catlett, C., Cesario, E., Talia, D., & Vinci, A. (2019). Spatio-temporal crime predic -
 tions in smart cities: A data-driven approach and experiments.  Pervasive and
 Mobile Computing , 53, 62–74.
 Cave, S., Dihal, K., & Dillon, S., (eds.). (2020).  AI narratives: A history of imagina -
 tive thinking about intelligent machines . Oxford University Press, Oxford.
 Coletta, C., Evans, L., Heaphy, L., & Kitchin, R. (Eds.). (2019).  Creating smart cities .
 Routledge, London and New York.
 Crawford, K. (2021).  Atlas of AI: Power, politics, and the planetary costs of artificial
 intelligence . Yale University Press, New Haven and London.
 Cugurullo, F. (2018). The origin of the smart city imaginary: From the dawn of
 modernity to the eclipse of reason. In Linder, C. & Meissner, M. (Eds.)  The
 Routledge companion to urban imaginaries . Routledge, London, 113–124.
 Cugurullo, F. (2020). Urban artificial intelligence: From automation to autonomy in
 the smart city.  Frontiers in Sustainable Cities , 2, 38.
 Cugurullo, F. (2021).  Frankenstein urbanism: Eco, smart and autonomous cities, arti -
 ficial intelligence and the end of the city . Routledge, London and New York.
 Cugurullo, F., Acheampong, R. A., Gueriau, M., & Dusparic, I. (2021). The transi -
 tion to autonomous cars, the redesign of cities and the future of urban sustainabil -
 ity.  Urban Geography , 42(6), 833–859.
 Curran, D., & Smart, A. (2021). Data-driven governance, smart urbanism and risk-
 class inequalities: Security and social credit in China.  Urban Studies , 58(3),
 487–506.
 Datta, A. (2015). A 100 smart cities, a 100 utopias.  Dialogues in Human Geography ,
 5(1), 49–53.
 Del Casino Jr, V. J. (2016). Social geographies II: Robots.  Progress in Human
 Geography , 40(6), 846–855.
 Dowling, R., & M c Guirk, P. (2022). Autonomous vehicle experiments and the city.
 Urban Geography , 43(3), 409–426.


<!-- Page 18 -->

Introducing AI into urban studies  17
 Elmqvist, T., Andersson, E., McPhearson, T., Bai, X., Bettencourt, L., Brondizio, E.,
 … & Van Der Leeuw, S. (2021). Urbanization in and for the Anthropocene.  Urban
 Sustainability , 1(1), 1–6.
 Fields, D., Bissell, D., & Macrorie, R. (2020). Platform methods: Studying platform
 urbanism outside the black box.  Urban Geography , 41(3), 462–468.
 Fisher, E. (2022). Do algorithms have a right to the city? Waze and algorithmic spati -
 ality.  Cultural Studies , 36(1), 74–95.
 Gaio, A., & Cugurullo, F. (2023). Cyclists and autonomous vehicles at odds: Can the
 transport oppression cycle be broken in the era of artificial intelligence?  AI &
 Society , 38(3), 1223–1237.
 Galway-Witham, J., & Stringer, C. (2018). How did Homo sapiens evolve?  Science ,
 360(6395), 1296–1298.
 Greenfield, A. (2018).  Radical technologies: The design of everyday life . Verso Books,
 London.
 Hagendorff, T. (2020). The ethics of AI ethics: An evaluation of guidelines.  Minds and
 Machines , 30(1), 99–120.
 Harvey, D. (1989).  The condition of postmodernity: An enquiry into the origins of
 cultural change . Wiley-Blackwell, London.
 Hodson, M., Kasmire, J., McMeekin, A., Stehlin, J. G., & Ward, K. (Eds.). (2020).
 Urban platforms and the future city: Transformations in infrastructure, govern -
 ance, knowledge and everyday life . Routledge, London.
 Jackman, A. (2022). Domestic drone futures.  Political Geography , 97, 102653.
 Kaddar, M., Barak, N., Hoop, M., Kirchberg, V., & de Shalit, A. (2022). The artistic
 spirit of cities: How cities influence artists’ agency.  Cities , 130, 103843.
 Kaker, S. A., Evans, J., Cugurullo, F., Cook, M., & Petrova, S. (2020). Expanding
 cities: Living, planning and governing uncertainty. In Scoones, I. & Stirling, A.
 (Eds.),  The politics of uncertainty . Routledge, London, 85–98.
 Kanal, L. N., and Lemmer, J. F. (Eds.). (2014).  Uncertainty in artificial intelligence .
 Elsevier, Amsterdam.
 Karvonen, A., Cugurullo, F., & Caprotti, F. (2019).  Inside smart cities . Routledge,
 London and New York.
 Kitchin, R. (2020). Civil liberties or public health, or civil liberties and public health?
 Using surveillance technologies to tackle the spread of COVID-19.  Space and
 Polity , 24(3), 362–381.
 Kitchin, R., & McArdle, G. (2016). What makes Big Data, Big Data? Exploring the onto -
 logical characteristics of 26 datasets.  Big Data & Society , 3(1), 2053951716631130.
 Langer, M., Oster, D., Speith, T., Hermanns, H., Kästner, L., Schmidt, E., … Baum, K.
 (2021). What do we want from Explainable Artificial Intelligence (XAI)?–A stake -
 holder perspective on XAI and a conceptual model guiding interdisciplinary XAI
 research.  Artificial Intelligence , 296, 103473.
 Lee, K. F. (2018).  AI superpowers: China, Silicon Valley, and the new world order .
 Houghton Mifflin, Boston.
 Lee, M. S. A., & Floridi, L. (2021). Algorithmic fairness in mortgage lending: From
 absolute conditions to relational trade-offs.  Minds and Machines , 31(1), 165–191.
 Levesque, H. J. (2017).  Common sense, the turing test, and the quest for real AI:
 Reflections on natural and artificial intelligence . MIT Press, Cambridge.
 Lin, W., Adey, P., & Harris, T. (2022). Dispositions towards automation: Capital,
 technology,  and  labour  relations  in  aeromobilities.  Dialogues  in  Human
 Geography , 20438206221121652.


<!-- Page 19 -->

18  Federico Cugurullo et al.
 Lynch, C. R., Bissell, D., House-Peters, L. A., & Del Casino Jr, V. J. (2022). Robotics,
 affective displacement, and the automation of care.  Annals of the American
 Association of Geographers , 112(3), 684–691.
 Lupia, A., McCubbins, M. D., & Popkin, S. L. (Eds.). (2000).  Elements of reason:
 Cognition, choice, and the bounds of rationality . Cambridge University Press,
 Cambridge.
 Luque-Ayala, A., & Marvin, S. (2020).  Urban operating systems: Producing the com -
 putational city . MIT Press, Cambridge.
 Luusua, A., Ylipulli, J., Foth, M., & Aurigi, A. (2023). Urban AI: Understanding the
 emerging role of artificial intelligence in smart cities.  AI and Society , 8, 1039–1044.
 Macrorie, R., Marvin, S., & While, A. (2021). Robotics and automation in the city:
 A research agenda.  Urban Geography , 42(2), 197–217.
 Mara, M., & Appel, M. (2015). Effects of lateral head tilt on user perceptions of
 humanoid and android robots.  Computers in Human Behavior , 44, 326–334.
 Martens, K., Beyazit, E., Henenson, E., Thomopoulos, N., Milakis, D., Mladenović,
 M., … Negulescu, M. (2022). Autonomous and Connected Transport as Part of an
 Inclusive Transport System: WG2: Social Challenges.
 Marvin, S., While, A., Chen, B., & Kovacic, M. (2022). Urban AI in China: Social
 control  or  hyper-capitalist  development  in  the  post-smart  city?  Frontiers  in
 Sustainable Cities , 155, 1–11.
 McDaniel, J. L., & Pease, K. (Eds.). (2021).  Predictive policing and artificial intelli -
 gence . Routledge, London.
 Munn, L. (2022). The uselessness of AI ethics.  AI and Ethics , 3, 869–877.
 Moran, D., Kanemoto, K., Jiborn, M., Wood, R., Többen, J., & Seto, K. C. (2018).
 Carbon footprints of 13 000 cities.  Environmental Research Letters , 13(6),
 064041.
 Müller, B. C., Gao, X., Nijssen, S. R., & Damen, T. G. (2021). I, robot: How human
 appearance  and  mind  attribution  relate  to  the  perceived  danger  of  robots.
 International Journal of Social Robotics , 13(4), 691–701.
 Nikitas, A., Thomopoulos, N., & Milakis, D. (2021). The environmental and resource
 dimensions of automated transport: A nexus for enabling vehicle automation to
 support sustainable urban mobility.  Annual Review of Environment and Resources ,
 46, 167–192.
 O'Neil, C. (2016).  Weapons of math destruction: How Big Data increases inequality
 and threatens democracy . Penguin, London.
 Pozharliev, R., De Angelis, M., Rossi, D., Romani, S., Verbeke, W., & Cherubino, P.
 (2021). Attachment styles moderate customer responses to frontline service robots:
 Evidence from affective, attitudinal, and behavioral measures.  Psychology &
 Marketing , 38(5), 881–895.
 Quitzow, L., & Rohde, F. (2022). Imagining the smart city through smart grids?
 Urban energy futures between technological experimentation and the imagined
 low-carbon city.  Urban Studies , 59(2), 341–359.
 Richardson, R., Schultz, J. M., & Crawford, K. (2019). Dirty data, bad predictions:
 How civil rights violations impact police data, predictive policing systems, and
 justice.  NYUL Review Online , 94, 15.
 Rubenstein, M., Ahler, C., Hoff, N., Cabrera, A., & Nagpal, R. (2014). Kilobot: A
 low cost robot with scalable operations designed for collective behaviors.  Robotics
 and Autonomous Systems , 62(7), 966–975.


<!-- Page 20 -->

Introducing AI into urban studies  19
 Russell, S. (2019).  Human compatible: Artificial intelligence and the problem of con -
 trol . Penguin, London.
 Russell, S. J., & Norvig, P. (2016).  Artificial intelligence: A modern approach . Pearson
 Education Limited, Harlow.
 Samoili, S., Lopez Cobo, M., Gomez Gutierrez, E., De Prato, G., Martinez-Plumed, F.,
 & Delipetrev, B.  (2020). AI WATCH. Defining Artificial Intelligence, EUR 30117
 EN, Publications Office of the European Union, doi: 10.2760/382730 , JRC118163.
 Schaller, B. (2021). Can sharing a ride make for less traffic? Evidence from Uber and
 Lyft and implications for cities.  Transport Policy , 102, 1–10.
 Sherry, Y., & Thompson, N. C. (2021). How fast do algorithms improve?  Proceedings
 of the IEEE , 109(11), 1768–1777.
 Son, T. H., Weedon, Z., Yigitcanlar, T., Sanchez, T., Corchado, J. M., & Mehmood,
 R. (2023). Algorithmic urban planning for smart and sustainable development:
 Systematic review of the literature.  Sustainable Cities and Society , 104562, 1–43.
 Strengers, Y., & Kennedy, J. (2021).  The smart wife: Why Siri, Alexa, and other smart
 home devices need a feminist reboot . MIT Press, Cambridge.
 Sumartojo, S., Lundberg, R., Kulić, D., Tian, L., Carreno-Medrano, P., Mintrom, M.,
 … & Allen, A. (2022). The robotic production of spatiality: Predictability, parti -
 tioning, and connection.  Transactions of the Institute of British Geographers ,
 48(1), 56–68.
 Talebian, A., & Mishra, S. (2022). Unfolding the state of the adoption of connected
 autonomous  trucks  by  the  commercial  fleet  owner  industry.  Transportation
 Research Part E: Logistics and Transportation Review , 158, 102616.
 Tiddi, I., Bastianelli, E., Daga, E., d’Aquin, M., & Motta, E. (2020). Robot–city interac -
 tion: Mapping the research landscape—a survey of the interactions between robots
 and modern cities.  International Journal of Social Robotics , 12(2), 299–324.
 Toumey, C. (2013). Nanobots today.  Nature Nanotechnology , 8(7), 475–476.
 van der Graaf, S., & Ballon, P. (2019). Navigating platform urbanism.  Technological
 Forecasting and Social Change , 142, 364–372.
 Valdez, M., & Cook, M. (2023). Humans, robots and artificial intelligences reconfig -
 uring urban life in a crisis.  Frontiers in Sustainable Cities , 5, 27.
 While, A. H., Marvin, S., & Kovacic, M. (2021). Urban robotic experimentation: San
 Francisco. Tokyo and Dubai,  Urban Studies , 58(4), 769–786.
 Willis, K. S., & Aurigi, A. (Eds.). (2020).  The Routledge companion to smart cities .
 Routledge, London and New York.
 Winner, L. (1978).  Autonomous technology: Technics-out-of-control as a theme in
 political thought . MIT Press, Cambridge.
 Wirtz, J., Patterson, P. G., Kunz, W. H., Gruber, T., Lu, V. N., Paluch, S., & Martins,
 A. (2018). Brave new world: Service robots in the frontline.  Journal of Service
 Management , 29, 907–931.
 Yigitcanlar, T., Agdas, D., & Degirmenci, K. (2023). Artificial intelligence in local
 governments: Perceptions of city managers on prospects, constraints and choices.
 AI & Society , 38, 1135–1150.
 Zhang, J., Hua, X. S., Huang, J., Shen, X., Chen, J., Zhou, Q., et al. (2019). City
 brain: Practice of large-scale artificial intelligence in the real world.  IET Smart
 Cities  1, 28–37.
 Zuboff, S. (2019).  The age of surveillance capitalism: The fight for a human future at
 the new frontier of power . Profile books, London.
 View publication stats